Aotearoa, kaitiakitanga, mana whenua.
This time, I said five last time, yes.
Oh, okay, this one.
Cool. We are poised and listening carefully.
Okay, so we conditionally support the Electoral Boundary Amendment Bill
as we agree with the principle to shift the
a quota to be put into every two cycles, election cycles rather than every five years.
A bit of anomaly that you might remember that between 1993 and 2002,
2003 election had new election boundaries.
Wow.
Yeah, that's something, thank goodness I was a little kid
and I wouldn't have known that at the time.
I don't even know that my local MP was Roger Sowery when I was a kid
and later had his wife as a teacher at college.
Now, an interesting reason behind that is Wellington City Council.
Now, this is something that I do believe needs to be re-put out there.
Basically, 2018 representation review and they couldn't use 2018 census statistics
because they weren't available yet, so they had to use 2013 data,
which, okay, that's all good.
However, in 2021, they enacted for a Maori ward
and then they can embed the 2013 statistics data into it,
which, yo, this is why happens when you change from different mayors
and all leaderships and I wouldn't blame the mayor itself,
I blame the council.
In 2024, when we're looking at having another popular,
when it was potentially could be looked back up on the cards,
it was decided not to hold one because of how much it cost money.
Currently Wellington City Council is operating on 2013 census data
in 2006, so it's council boards.
Now, thankfully...
Unbelievable. You know that for sure.
Yes.
Well, the data that worked out there is population adjustments
that go with it, but the guesstimates,
well, but the guesstimates are from 2018.
Thankfully, we will have in this trillium
with Wellington City Council, we will actually have our war boundaries
accurately calculated, but we do believe
if the census data bill goes through and gets properly
and gets its estimation parts to work properly,
this will make this particular bill fantastically work for,
particularly for both local government and for central government,
when it comes to working both general electorates,
Maori electorates and Maori wards and City Council
general wards as well, so that we can at least have a more accurate
calculation rather than the, like, Wellington City Council
currently still operating on its 2013 population statistics.
Thank goodness at least some of the other Wellington councils
are actually working on more modern numbers,
but I know Wellington's one's very well because I submitted
on both the bill in 2018 and again in 2021
on trying to get Paikawa-Kawa's sub-award,
a third councillor, and in 2018, I didn't...
No, in 2018?
Paikawa just moved out of the area.
Yeah, so during... Oh, no, in 2021,
I didn't actually live in the constituent seat,
but I still was trying to push it because it was the odd one out.
So, yeah, we'd like to see potentially a shift.
This bill, if it can tie with the other one to proceed,
so hopefully have more accurate council boundaries.
Very good.
Clear messages?
Questions or kind of more answer what they were?
I think they're well, we're just starting on the side.
So, thank you.
Thanks again for coming today.
Appreciate it.
We really do.
Right, now Fiona, hopefully by Zoom, is that right?
Fiona, it's not with some algorithms.
Okay, the next submitter just to be clear
is the Piri Ratko Tribal Authority.
Also, by Zoom.
Okay.
Keita, are you available?
Yes.
Nice that we can see you now too.
Great. Now, we've got 10 minutes with you,
looking forward to hearing what you've got to say.
Thank you.
We oppose the Lectural District Boundaries Amendment Bill,
2026.
This bill deliberately slows how representation keeps up
with population.
Right now, the Maori population and enrollment growth
justifies an additional Māori seat. An eighth seat is due. That's based on the
current data, not projections. But instead of allowing that adjustment, the
Electoral District Boundaries Amendment Bill changes the timing rules delaying
that process further. This is not neutral, this creates a representation lag by
design. Boundary reviews are pushed out to every second parliamentary term. New
counting rules exclude recent data and the system locks in that delay. The
result is simple. Māori representation falls behind where it should be. For
Pere Rākau, this has a real impact. We represent thousands of whānau across
our marae. Our population is growing, our enrollment is growing. If seats do not
increase, where the numbers justify, then our voting powers in effect is
reduced. This is also inconsistent with the Crown's own actions. In 2025, the
Crown apologised to Ngāhapū o Ngāti Rāngenui, including Pere Rākau, that
acknowledged our rangatiratanga and committed to a relationship based on
partnership and equity. And here we are one year later, the Electoral District
Boundaries Amendment Bill proposes a system that delays Māori representation.
Those two positions can't coexist. Under Ticititi, this matters. Active
protection means protecting Māori participation. Equity means our
representation must keep pace with our population. This bill does neither. It
also raises a basic democratic issue. If the population grows but
representation does not adjust in time, then some votes are worth less than
others. That affects Māori most of all, but affects actually the integrity of
the whole system. And this isn't something that can just be fixed later.
If the next election runs without an additional Māori seat that is already
justified, that loss of representation is real and permanent for that
cycle. You can't rewind that. So our position is clear. Withdraw the Electoral
District Boundaries Amendment Bill, 2026, recognise that an 8th Māori seat is
already warranted, ensuring representation reflects the current
population not delayed data. So in closing, this is not just an
administrative change. It's a decision about whether representation keeps
pace with the people. Right now the numbers, as I've said, support
increased Māori representation. This bill stops that from happening when it
should, which in our view should be assessed as illegal. And that is why we
oppose this bill. Happy to take questions. Okay. Thank you. Hey, thank
you for that. Can I just ask, do you have a clear view why the Māori
Electoral Boundaries is not going to be reviewed before the 2029
election? Do you have a clear understanding of why that's taken place?
Sorry, could you clarify that question? Sorry, do you have a clear view as to why
the electoral boundary for Māori electorates are not going to be
undertaken prior to 2029? Has anyone explained it to you from Stats
New Zealand or Herver? Or Electoral? Whatever? No. No, okay. Well, that's
an issue in itself. I've got a question.
I will, sorry, I will add to that though. Whether it's in 2029 or whether it
goes with the current system of every six years or every five years,
the amendment and the adjustment can be made and adapted, this bill can
adapt it for it to happen now. Yeah, no, it's just my point.
Shannon, did you have a question? Sorry, I saw your hand go up and
Thank you, Mr Chair. Just a follow up from Andrew's question there. What's
the motivation, I guess, or what's your understanding of why the
government is putting through legislation that in fact delays the
opportunity of an AAC being recognised?
I mean, I won't speak for the government. The recent history would
indicate that this is consistent with several applications in terms of
things. Māori that have pushed Māori and slowed Māori progress
down. And this looks and appears to be a continuation of that. It
makes that assessment happen less. And Māori, as we all know, is a
very young population. And so the chances are, and the numbers
would indicate that the likelihood is the numbers will go up, not
down. And so slowing that from every six, every five years to every
six years slows that increased population or that increased
representation in perpetuity.
All right. Hey, thank you for your submission and you've submitted
on a few. So thank you for coming back.
Right now, are we going back to in person?
Right, we've got
to Wahini border. Is that is it? Is it your game? Oh, good.
You're becoming a professional.
Well, just try my best.
OK, now we've got to have 10 minutes with him. OK.
Lena's not here, so that's where he was on time ago.
There's more.
Tenakoutou, ita miti aloh.
Ko ha kapa, for oingua.
I'm nervous again.
I submit an opposition to aspects of the electoral
district boundaries amendment bill that affect the timing
methodology and underlying data used to determine electoral
boundaries, particularly where these intersect with proposed
changes within the data and statistics sense this amendment
bill relating to the calculation of the Maori electoral
population, MEP, which is my area.
This is where I've zoned in.
So I've learned a lot.
It's been great.
Section 79, determination of the Maori electoral
population, the proposed amendment to section 79, two,
which redefines counting day by reference to section
three, one B, is a critical change that requires
close scrutiny than it currently appears to be receiving.
While presented as a technical adjustment, this amendment
has substantive implications for how the MEP
is determined in practice.
The concept of counting day is not neutral.
It directly influences which population data is captured
and how representation is calculated.
Public debate has focused on the risk that delayed
boundary reviews may lead to future underrepresentation
of Maori.
However, this framing assumes that the current
MEP statistical formula is equitable.
My grassroots analysis suggests that the statistical
formula is structurally flawed and already
and already underestimates the Maori descent population
for electoral purposes.
Again, the Maori ratio, no one is speaking about that.
It's out.
The use of the Maori ratio is outdated.
I'm patient.
So I have no problem with the changes.
And, you know, and I think it's the represent,
was it the representation commission?
You're a meaning, which is why I'm sort of just
I'm OK with delays because everything takes time
and there are specific things.
And again, you know, I'm finalising a
private member's bill specifically about addressing this.
Redefining counting day without addressing the underlying
statistical formula risks compounding the problem.
A flawed statistical formula
when applied to a newly defined or differently sourced
data set does not become more accurate.
It becomes less transparent and more difficult to scrutinise.
So my my recommendation, one of my recommendations
is to change the definition of counting day.
Changes to the definition of counting day should not proceed
in isolation from a full independent review
of an electoral population, statistical formula.
I did write in EMP,
electoral population, statistical formula review.
But like you pointed,
Chairman Bailey pointed out last year and I didn't get it.
That I was really focused on the EMP.
But of course, EMP
correlates with the the general electoral population.
So if the EMP
Māori seats increase by three, the general
electorates are going to go into decrease by three.
And in abolishing, basically, again, just briefly, I'll wrap it up.
The use, the outdated use of the Māori ratio, we should have 10
Māori seats because that
that takes that takes into account Māori on the general role.
They can, the general electoral population can still have those numbers.
But without the the inequity use,
an equitable use of the Māori ratio, it's actually 10.
If it was total equity, equity within the statistical formula,
we would have 14 seats and that's the total Māori descent population.
So I think 10 would be a much better choice in the future.
So that's how.
And just to finish off.
The methodology used to determine the EMP must be transparent,
independently reviewed and demonstrably equitable,
including considerations of obligations under Tītiti or Waitanyu
is reflected in amendments in the data and statistics census amendment bill
and recommended amendments to the data and statistics act 2022.
So thank you for this opportunity.
Any questions?
Right, Camilla.
Oh, thank you.
Thank you for submitting today for being with us.
I said a question about the content of what is likely to be in the bill around
assessing the Māori population.
What are you, what kind of factors
are you considering, including in that?
It has to, I think it will be an electoral population,
statistical formula bill.
It has to include the GDP as well, because they correlate and with the
more equitable.
Statistical formula options, which I've given to, you know,
which would increase to 10 or increase to 14, I think, you know,
10 might be more, more.
Anyway, so the crux of it is the Māori ratio,
which I tried to speak on this morning.
So they're in the bill.
Yeah, in that bill and how it's worded, but it's not stated.
It's the Māori ratio that speaks of proportionate,
which is just an estimate that it's an assumption of the behaviour
of unenrolled Māori in the future is going to be the same as enrolled.
So the Māori ratio is what has to be addressed and, yeah, in the bill.
Now, I've got a question from Paul.
Thanks. We'll look forward to getting your bill.
And we can look over in more detail.
It sounds interesting.
This the idea around the Māori descent populations come up
a few times today and you've said you think it's underestimated.
So, but to accurately get that would just still be self-reporting.
So people would just say that they're a Māori descent
or how are you envisaging that we can better capture that?
This is that's not my area, although I'm learning today.
Yeah, you know, I've learned a lot today by the experts.
I think more work can be done with the Māori electorates,
the Māori electorate MPs and Iwi
to work with Māori out there or even to get it out there
to get even more people enrolled, but not just that,
just to understand the process a little bit more.
I'm sort of losing it now.
That's OK.
So we're just doing more paper here.
I personally think more can be done through the Māori electorates.
There's only seven, but, you know, they've got iwi behind them.
So and a lot of them are multi-billion dollar, you know,
incorporations now.
So it's just just some great think tanks.
No, we previously canvassed this issue around the formula, right?
And so as we said this morning, we responded to you on that,
right, you're wrongly, the new issue that you're raising today
is around the counting day reference counting day.
Can you just be a little bit more specific?
Why do you think that's unfair?
Well, it's why count Māori in the first place?
You know, to say it's a counting, you know,
to redefine the counting day,
which isn't neutral, it connects to the counting day
is all about Māori data.
So why should we even have a counting day?
You need a reference point for everyone.
It's a reference point when you determine what the population is.
So then you can calculate the electorate.
Right. And one of the issues is whether you do it every five years
or you do it every six years, the one of the few,
one of the advantage of this new system means that you can do it more timely,
i.e. more regularly and therefore do it six,
every six years, if I understand this correctly,
which means there's more accurate representation of how many Māori are there,
for instance, on the roll.
I'm all for more, you know, more often, more frequent.
But what's the point of having, you know, more frequent, more accurate data collecting
if that data does not produce fairness or equity?
It's still under-representated.
So I support that, you know.
But it's the structure is forward still.
So we're still going to be over here more accurate,
but still under-representated.
OK. Pete, thank you again today.
All right. Good stuff. Thank you.
Right. Now, we are going to...
Yeah, Tangi Kauraua nursery.
If you're available, that would be great.
Are they on screen?
All right, cool.
Welcome, if you're there.
How are you going?
Sorry, just realised I had my camera and my mute button on.
No problem at all.
Hey, now, we've got 10 minutes with you,
looking forward to hearing what you've got to say.
My name is Jessamyn Oanoa, and thank you for inviting me to participate.
I really appreciate that.
And as you were saying, I'm from Tangi Karoro native nursery.
And thank you for inviting me to participate.
I really appreciate that.
And as you were saying, I'm from Tangikaroro Native Nursery.
My wanting to participate is because I am concerned
that many of the whānau where I'm from in Te Araroa,
which is on the east coast,
most northern point of the North,
sorry, eastern point of the North Island.
Very isolated rural Māori community.
I'm currently in Auckland right now
just because I'm here for a hui.
But normally you would find me in a little town called Te Araroa.
So I wanted to support what our
Ewi Chairs Forum representatives said earlier.
I've been watching at different times throughout the day.
I particularly wanted to point out a quote that I've written
from Hiri Kōwhai Mikaere.
If you don't count people, you do not see them.
If you don't see people, you don't serve them.
That's my concern regarding the bill as it stands.
My concern is that specific sectors of the community
would be left out.
Their voices would not be heard.
And also with the proposed delay with the census data
that not being collected in this current cycle,
but being collected later on if it's adopted.
I'm just concerned that there are many young rangatahi
who have now graduated from local schools, secondary schools.
My daughter's one of them.
She's now going to AUT.
Rangatahi who will be their first time voting
in this upcoming elections.
Whose data is significant.
It's going to be important.
It's going to show the huge increase
in the number of young Māori that are going to be
participating in the elections and as voters.
What I've seen in the amendment is that our whānau
who are incarcerated will not have the benefit
of being able to vote if it carries the way that it's written.
And I just wanted to point out that at least 70% of women
in prison at the moment are young Māori female.
And that is a huge concern for our people.
Same with our men over 50% of our male
prison population are Māori.
So that also is a concern to me.
I want to see a more fair way for our people forward
where they are able to participate in the decisions
that are going to impact hugely on their lives.
I want to see resources that can help
with the rehabilitation of our people.
But what I also wanted to point out
is that, sorry, I just referred to my notes,
iwi Māori are not advisers or priority communities.
We are your partners.
I agree with that statement that Kere Kōwhai mentioned earlier
and also when she mentioned about many Māori
are not even visible in government service data
and that there are far reaching consequences
for iwi in the Crown.
I'll give you an example of that
in terms of what I do as a co-owner operator
with my dad for our native plant nursery.
We have had our application to participate in the seed
that because Te Rurākau is paying for the research,
they will own the IP for anything that's taking fibre
from those trees that are grown on erosion prone land
that they hope to then take their knowledge
on to other erosion prone land
up and down the state Highway 35.
I mean, I love the idea of us repopulating our
Te Tairawhiti region with native Te Punarākau.
My concern is that how does that sit
with mana when those seeds are actually taonga to us?
They come from our Te Punarākau, our taonga trees.
They represent the mana of our whenua that we are kautiaki of.
If we are not in the data,
then the mana of what we represent is also not in the data.
So that's why I'm saying that I totally agree
with our Iwi Chairs Forum asking for three solutions,
a Māori descent population file
and Iwi Māori survey program and Māori descent census.
And I'll give you another example of why that matters.
In November last year, I took my daughter
because she was very ill with eczema.
And while we were waiting to be helped for six hours
in that time, we were seen once at the beginning
when we first arrived and then much later on at 5.30 in the morning,
we arrived at something like 11 at night, the night before.
My daughter wasn't seen because I couldn't prove
that she was a New Zealand citizen born in New Zealand
of Māori descent.
She was born in that hospital, Middlemore Hospital.
Her father was born at Middlemore Hospital.
I am mana whenua, as well as tanata whenua.
And still, my daughter couldn't get the help that she needed.
Sorry about this.
That was the time we were meant to start.
But what I'm saying to you is
if data was consistent across departments
that represented our ethnicity, our...
Sorry, I just need to get back to what I had written.
If there had already been a Māori descent population file,
that wouldn't have happened to my daughter.
She was bleeding and we were visible where we were to everybody.
There was no space for her to go into a private room
so that she could at least not be so visible
with all the eczema all over her body.
It was a really traumatic experience for us as a whānau.
Not just the eczema, but to be asked to justify being Māori,
to justify being a New Zealand citizen
and to have to justify that we had the right to be treated
in our own hospital where she was born.
So that's why this sort of data is important.
It needs to be captured.
It needs to be shared across different departments
in the same way so that our children aren't victimised
and traumatised this way.
It shouldn't be happening to any New Zealand citizen,
not just Māori but any New Zealand citizen,
but particularly because we have whakapapa to Ngātaki Tāmaki,
we have whakapapa to Ngāti Porou, Te Whānau Apanui.
So it was very damaging for us.
Thanks, Jasmine.
Sorry to hear you about your daughter.
I hope she's better now.
Yes, she is.
Good.
Now, I've got a question from Rima Nakle.
Thank you, Mr Chair.
Jasmine Rima Nakle, Member of Parliament for Takāneini.
More on proposition again.
I'm really sad to hear what you went through
and if you'd like my office to follow up and give you,
try and understand why you guys went through that,
I'm happy to take that on board,
whether you're in my electorate or not,
because I think you deserve answers
if something was untoward.
But I guess one of the aims for what we're doing
is to try and collect data in a more streamlined way.
But yeah, please feel free to contact me, Rima Nakle,
and I'm happy to try and understand more for you
and your whānau how that happened.
Thank you, Rima.
All right.
I don't think we've got any questions for you,
but you're a similar theme,
so it's not that we don't understand the issue.
We've had a number of people raise the issue,
so thank you for your contribution this afternoon.
Are you back home? Back home up north?
I will be going back home next weekend.
All right, no doubt.
Can't wait to get back to the coast.
Oh, kāwhai, kāwhai, looking forward to it.
Bye-bye.
Right, now, are we going back to Fiona?
No, she's...
Right, it sounds like we've done pretty about Fiona.
Now, we're going to Sam, I'm going to have to ask you,
and yes, all of you,
we're going into a process where we can talk about...